Article on the Lie.js library (#1767)
codurance/site: src/_posts/2020-05-19-promises-and-lies.md

---
layout: post
asset-type: post
name: promises-and-lies
title: Promises and Lies
date: 2020-05-19 10:00:00 +00:00
author: Christopher Eyre
description: Adding timeouts to Promises in Javascript.
image:
    src: /assets/custom/img/blog/lie.png
tags:
    - javascript
    - node
    - reliability
abstract: Adding timeouts to Promises in Javascript. Introducing lie.js 
alias: [/2020/05/19/promises-and-lies]
---

## Promises in Javascript

Promises were added to Javascript as a standard means to avoid nesting callback functions.

> Without promises, each function could have its own functions to be called once the job is complete. They are mostly used for asynchronous events. They are not a means of lazy evaluation or for process control. Functions that have an async result typically now return a Promise.

Reviewer: Capitalization 

Without Promises, each function could have its own functions to be called once the job is complete.

Promises have the following format:

```javascript

> const promise = new Promise(executor);

Reviewer: Capitalization

const Promise

```

where executor is a function that looks like:

```javascript
function(resolve, reject){
    // typically, some asynchronous operation.
}
``` 

Where resolve and reject are functions that take the result as a single parameter.

Promises are used like this:

```javascript

> promise.then(console.log('It worked'))

Reviewer: Capitalization

Promise.then(console.log('It worked'))

       .catch(console.log('It failed'))
       .finally( console.log('It is over') )
```

> It is possible to return a promise from a promise so that they can be chained. Note that the catch at the end of a chain will catch whichever reject happens first.

Reviewer: Capitalization

It is possible to return a Promise from a Promise so that they can be chained.

> Once a promise has resolved to a value, then it will always resolve to the same value. You can, therefore, call `then` on a given promise multiple times and it will always return the same result. I'll come back to this concept later.

Reviewer: Capitalization

Once a Promise has resolved to a value, then it will always resolve to the same value. You can, therefore, call `then` on a given Promise multiple times and it will always return the same result.

> Promises also have no means of being cancelled. The only output of them is through actions of the resolve or reject functions. This means that it is possible to cache a promise - just note that the cached promise could have already failed!

Reviewer: Capitalization

This means that it is possible to cache a Promise - just note that the cached Promise could have already failed!

## The Promise class

> The javascript promise class has the following static functions:

Reviewer: Capitalization

The javascript Promise class has the following static functions:

```Javascript
Promise.all( ) 
```

This will turn iterable of Promises into a Promise that will either return an iterable of the success values or the first failure condition.

```Javascript
Promise.allSettled()
```

This will take an iterable of Promises and returns a Promise that will return an iterable of the results (either resolved or rejected).

```Javascript
Promise.race()
```

This will take an iterable of Promises and returns a Promise that will return the result of the first resolved or rejected Promise.

```Javascript
Promise.reject()
```

This returns a Promise that has been rejected with the given reason.  

```Javascript
Promise.resolve()
```

> This will either return the result of a supplied promise or will return a Promise that has resolved the supplied data.

Reviewer: Capitalization

This will either return the result of a supplied Promise or will return a Promise that has resolved the supplied data.

## What is missing?

The standard library has no built-in concept of timeout. This means that each user must consider (or more likely ignore) this important concept. Without a controlled timeout you have no means of ensuring that a given `then()` will ever return.

Serverless functions are one example of where a fixed timeout is essential. The serverless framework adds a timeout value that defaults to 6 seconds. It is important that you get to choose how you handle failure rather than just having the function fail.
More importantly, you are charged on execution time so waiting for a function to return costs money. 

## Introducing lie.js

This is where [lie.js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lie.js) comes in. It provides a standard means of adding timeouts to Promises. These are very small functions that bring in no additional dependencies.

> It currently provides two helper functions that are intended to be used in a Promise.race with an existing promise.

Reviewer: Capitalization

It currently provides two helper functions that are intended to be used in a Promise.race with an existing Promise.

### orReject

```javascript
Promise.race([yourPromise, orReject('bang', 1)])
```

> This will reject the promise with the given value after the timeout.

Reviewer: Capitalization

This will reject the Promise with the given value after the timeout.

### orTimeout

```javascript
Promise.race([yourPromise, orTimeout('bang', 1)])
```

> This will succeed the promise with the given value after the timeout.

Reviewer: Capitalization

This will succeed the Promise with the given value after the timeout.

> These two simple functions allow you to add timeout functionality to any Javascript promise.

Reviewer: Capitalization

These two simple functions allow you to add timeout functionality to any Javascript Promise.

## Promises do not have a cancel option!

> I did promise that I would come back to the multiple evaluation point. Just because a promise in a race has been timed out does not mean that you can't try to get the result later.

Reviewer: Capitalization

Just because a Promise in a race has been timed out does not mean that you can't try to get the result later.

> ---

Reviewer: Please ensure that external links open in a new tab.

Reviewer 2: > Please ensure that external links open in a new tab. 

This happens automatically now on all external links of the website, assuming the browser has not disabled JavaScript

layout: post
asset-type: post
name: promises-and-lies
title: Promises and Lies
date: 2020-05-19 10:00:00 +00:00
author: Christopher Eyre

> description: Adding timeouts to promises in Javascript.

Reviewer: Capitalize Promises (consistency)

> image:

Reviewer: This image doesn't require photo attribution. Can we please move the attribution to the bottom of the post if at all.

    src: /assets/custom/img/blog/lie.png
    attribution:
        text: Public domain photo from Pixabay
        href: https://pixabay.com/photos/lying-promises-deception-dishonesty-1562272/
tags:
    - javascript
    - node
    - reliability
abstract: Adding timeouts to promises in Javascript. Introducing lie.js 
alias: [/2020/05/19/promises-and-lies]
---

## Promises in Javascript

Promises were added to Javascript as a standard means to avoid nesting callback functions.

> Before promises each function could have it's own functions that would be called once the job is completed. They are mostly used for asynchronous events. They are not a means of lazy evaluation or for process control. Functions that have an async result typically now return a Promise.

Reviewer 2: I think this reads more smoothly. 

```suggestion
Without promises each function could have its own functions to be called once the job is complete. They are mostly used for asynchronous events. They are not a means of lazy evaluation or for process control. Functions that have an async result typically now return a Promise.
```

> Before promises each function could have it's own functions that would be called once the job is completed. They are mostly used for asynchronous events. They are not a means of lazy evaluation or for process control. Functions that have an async result typically now return a Promise.

Reviewer: Punctuation change

Before promises, each function could have it's own functions that would be called once the job is completed. They are mostly used for asynchronous events.

Promises have the following format:

```javascript

> var promiseObj = new Promise(executor);

Reviewer 2: Do you feel particularly strongly about `promiseObj`. I'm thinking of Uncle Bob in Clean Code. On naming he say you should be able to pronounce variable names easily and he suggests not to include the type in the name. I'm with him on both these points.

```suggestion
var promise = new Promise(executor);
```

> var promiseObj = new Promise(executor);

Reviewer 2: I think ES6+ syntax useful to more of our audience these days.

```suggestion
const promise = new Promise(executor);
```

```

where executor is a function that looks like:

```javascript

> function(resolutionFunc, rejectionFunc){

Reviewer 2: Personally I would expect these to be named `resolve` and `reject` and might find it useful to see a bit more about how they're used.

```javascript
function(resolve, reject) {
  if(response.success) {
    resolve(response.data);
  } else {
    reject(new Error('Something went wrong'));
  }
}
```

    // typically, some asynchronous operation.
}
``` 

Promises are used like this:

```javascript

> promiseObj.then(console.log('It worked'))

Reviewer 2: Reference to previous comment about calling this `promise` (or `myPromise`) or something like that.

          .catch(console.log('It failed'))
          .finally( console.log('It is over') )
```

> You would typically do more in each block but this gives the idea. It is possible to return a promise from a promise so that they can be chained. Note that the catch at the end of a chain will catch whichever reject happens first.

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need the first sentence

```suggestion
It is possible to return a promise from a promise so that they can be chained. Note that the catch at the end of a chain will catch whichever reject happens first.
```

Once a promise has resolved to a value, then it will always resolve to the same value.

> You can therefore call then on a given promise multiple times and it will always return the same result. I'll come back to this concept later.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can therefore call `then` on a given promise multiple times and it will always return the same result. I'll come back to this concept later.
```

> You can therefore call then on a given promise multiple times and it will always return the same result. I'll come back to this concept later.

Reviewer: Punctuation change

You can, therefore, call then on a given promise multiple times and it will always return the same result.

Promises also have no means of being cancelled. The only output of them is through actions of the resolve or reject functions. This means that it is possible to cache a promise - just note that the cached promise could have already failed!

## The Promise class

The javascript promise class has the following static functions:

```Javascript
Promise.all( ) 
```

> This will turn an iteratable of Promises into a Promise that will either return an iteratable of the success values or the first failure condition.

Reviewer: Spelling:

This will turn iterable of Promises into a Promise that will either return an iterable of the success values or the first failure condition.

```Javascript
Promise.allSettled()
```

> This will take an iteratable of Promises and returns a Promise that will return an iteratable of the results (either resolved or rejected).

Reviewer: Spelling:

This will take an iterable of Promises and returns a Promise that will return an iterable of the results (either resolved or rejected).

```Javascript
Promise.race()
```

> This will take an iteratable of Promises and returns a Promise that will return the result of the first resolved or rejected Promise.

Reviewer: Spelling:

This will take an iterable of Promises and returns a Promise that will return the result of the first resolved or rejected Promise.

```Javascript
Promise.reject()
```

This returns a Promise that has been rejected with the given reason.  

```Javascript
Promise.resolve()
```

This will either return the result of a supplied promise or will return a Promise that has resolved the supplied data.

## What is missing?

> The standard library has no built-in concept of timeout. This means that each usage must consider (or more likely ignore) this important concept. Without a controlled timeout you have no means of ensuring that a given ```then()``` will ever return.

Reviewer 2: Does this need three backticks? No big deal but if it does I'll have to adjust to that. 

```suggestion
The standard library has no built-in concept of timeout. This means that each usage must consider (or more likely ignore) this important concept. Without a controlled timeout you have no means of ensuring that a given `then()` will ever return.
```

> The standard library has no built-in concept of timeout. This means that each usage must consider (or more likely ignore) this important concept. Without a controlled timeout you have no means of ensuring that a given ```then()``` will ever return.

Reviewer: user instead of usage

Serverless functions are one example of where a fixed timeout is essential. The serverless framework adds a timeout value that defaults to 6 seconds. It is important that you get to choose how you handle failure rather than just having the function fail.

> More importantly you are charged on execution time so waiting for a function to return costs money. 

Reviewer: Punctuation

More importantly, you are charged on execution time so waiting for a function to return costs money.

## Introducing lie.js

This is where [lie.js](https://www.npmjs.com/package/lie.js) comes in. It provides a standard means of adding timeouts to Promises. These are very small functions that bring in no additional dependencies.

It currently provides two helper functions that are intended to be used in a Promise.race with an existing promise.

> orReject

Reviewer 2: Just a suggestion:

```suggestion
### orReject
```

```javascript
Promise.race([yourPromise, orReject('bang', 1)])
```

This will reject the promise with the given value after the timeout.

> orTimeout

Reviewer 2: If you liked that last suggestion...

```suggestion
### orTimeout
```

```javascript
Promise.race([yourPromise, orTimeout('bang', 1)])
```

This will succeed the promise with the given value after the timeout.

These two simple functions allow you to add timeout functionality to any Javascript promise.

## Promises do not have a cancel option!

> I did promise that I would come back to the multiple evaluation point. You because a promise in a race has been timed out does not mean that you can't try to get the result later.

Reviewer 2: Typo?
```suggestion
I did promise that I would come back to the multiple evaluation point. Just because a promise in a race has been timed out does not mean that you can't try to get the result later.
```

> I did promise that I would come back to the multiple evaluation point. You because a promise in a race has been timed out does not mean that you can't try to get the result later.

Reviewer: Punctuation:

I did promise that I would come back to the multiple evaluation points. You, because a promise in a race has been timed out, does not mean that you can't try to get the result later.
